---
layout: scrollable_post
title: "Java Persistence API 💽☕"
category: java
tags: [Java, JPA]
published: true
---
The Java Persistence API (JPA) is the java community specification for persisting data between objects and a database. It was introduced to help form a standard with the emergence of different Object Relational Mapping (ORM)📦🗾 frameworks.

# Version History 📖🔗

- JPA 1.0 was released on May 11, 2006 using JSR 220.
- JPA 2.0 was released with the specifications of JAVA EE6 on December 10, 2009 using JSR 317.
- JPA 2.1 was released with the specification of JAVA EE7 on April 22, 2013 using JSR 338.
- JPA 2.2 is a maintenance release that was approved on 19 June 2017.

# Providers 🎁
A lot of the persistence vendors support JPA:
- [Hibernate (latest v5.2 supporting JPA 2.1)](http://hibernate.org/orm/)
- [EclipseLink (latest v2.4 supports some of JPA 2.1)](http://www.eclipse.org/eclipselink/)
- [Apache OpenJPA (v2.4.1 supporting JPA 2.0, v3.x under development to support JPA 2.1)](https://openjpa.apache.org/)

# Features 📋

- Object-relational mappings can be done through annotations, or in XML.
- JPA defines a runtime EntityManager API for processing queries and transaction on objects.
- JPA defines an object-level query language, JPQL.
- Criteria API can be used for dynamic query creation, and allows type checking on criteria. The Criteria API is a complement, and alternative to JPQL queries.
- Bean validation support. Entities can be annotated to enforce data constraints.
- Applications can be run inside a container, or standalone. So, developers can use JPA for web applications and desktop applications.
- JPA supports inheritance, polymorphism, and polymorphic queries.

The JPA 2.1 specification added new features that are not available in the JPA 2.0 specification. These features include:

- Schema generation
- Type conversion methods
- Entity graphs in queries and find operations
- Unsynchronized persistence contexts
- Stored procedure invocation
- Injection into Entity listener classes
- JPQL enhancements
- Criteria API enhancements
- Mapping of native queries

# How to use? 🔬

## 1. Create an entity class

The entity object is nothing but a POJO class marked as an entity with the @Entity annotation.

    @Entity
    public class Trade {
     @Id
     @GeneratedValue(strategy=GenerationType.AUTO)
     private int id = 0;

     private String direction = null;
     ...

The mappings are done through JPA Annotations here, but can done through a configuration file called orm.xml also.

There are a few points to keep in mind when creating an entity class:
- The entity class should have a default no-argument constructor.
- All fields are automatically persisted, there is no need to annotate with @column.
- Using a SQL keyword like *order* for a class name will cause problems. Either name it something else (CustomerOrder), or specify the table name as something else (see below).

      @Entity(name="orders")
      public class Order{

      }

- The entity class should not be final.
- If a persistent class inherits from a non-persistent class, the fields of the non-persistent superclass cannot be persisted.

## 2. A persistence.xml file

A configuration file placed in the META-INF folder; it's used to specify the persistence provider name, entity class names, and properties like the database connection URL, driver, user, password, and so on.

        <persistence xmlns="http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/persistence"
        xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
        xsi:schemaLocation="http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/persistence
        http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/persistence/persistence_2_0.xsd"
        version="2.0">
         <persistence-unit name="trade-mysql-pu" transaction-type="RESOURCE_LOCAL">
           <provider>org.hibernate.ejb.HibernatePersistence</provider>
           <class>com.madhusudhan.jsd.domain.jpa.Trade</class>
          <properties>
           <property name="hibernate.connection.url"
        value="jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/JSDATA"/>
           <property name="hibernate.connection.driver_class"
        value="com.mysql.jdbc.Driver"/>
           <property name="hibernate.dialect"
        value="org.hibernate.dialect.MySQL5Dialect"/>
        ...
           </properties>
         </persistence-unit>
        </persistence>

Some important things to note about persistence.xml:

- it can have multiple persistence units (a logical group of persistent classes, database settings, and relational mappings). Each unit can be used by different JPA vendor or can be used to persist to different databases.
- The vendor-specific persistence provider name is specified in the <provider> tag.
- The entity class names are specified in the <class> tag.
- The database connection properties can be specified within the <properties> tag.

## 3. Write a class that uses an EntityManager

The JPA specification classifies two types of entity managers:
- container-managed: typically a Java Enterprise Edition (JEE) container such as an application server or a web container
- standalone: standalone program.

In a standalone environment, you should create the EntityManager as shown here:

    private EntityManagerFactory factory = null;
    private EntityManager entityManager = null;
    ..
    private void init() {
      factory = Persistence.createEntityManagerFactory("trade-mysql-pu");
      entityManager = factory.createEntityManager();
    }

In a container-managed environment, the class with a reference to the entity manager
(typically DAO objects) will be injected with an existing EntityManager . The responsibility of looking up the persistence unit, creating the factory, and subsequently creating
and injecting the EntityManager are all taken care of by the JEE application container.

# Annotations
- Variables (field access) or getter methods (property access) can be annotated for mapping data. There is no big difference in which you use.
- If you annotate variables and a getter method, it changes the access type of the entity to property access, and can cause mapping issues. In that case, you need to be explicit with the access for everything. Below, we say that the access type is on fields for everything, except getId().

      @Entity
      @Access(AccessType.FIELD)
      public class Product{
          private long id;
          private String name;

          @id
          @Access(AccessType.PROPERTY)
          public Long getId(){
            return id;
          }
      }

|Name|Target|Purpose|
|---------------|----------------|------------------|
|    Entity     |    C    | Declare the class as entity to be persisted. |
|Table| C | Specify the table for the entity. The default table name is the name of the class with the first letter capitalized. You can set a name by: @Table(name="EMPLOYEE")|
|AccessType|	C, V, M? | If you set @AccessType(FIELD), then variables will be inspected. If you set @AccessType(PROPERTY), then getters will be inspected.|
|    Column     |    V, M    | Can provide the table column name if you want it to be different from the variable name. By default, the two names are assumed to be the same. |
|    id     |    V, M    | Specify the primary key. |
|    GeneratedValue     |    V, M    |   Specify a strategy to assign a unique value to your identity fields automatically. The types of strategies available are IDENTITY, SEQUENCE, TABLE, and AUTO. The default strategy is auto. |
|@JoinColumn| V, M	|Used to specify an entity association or entity collection. This is used in many- to-one and one-to-many associations.|
|@UniqueConstraint| P?	|Used to specify an unique constraint for the table.|
|ManyToMany|	V, M| Define a many-to-many relationship between the join Tables.|
|ManyToOne	| V, M | Define a many-to-one relationship between the join Tables.|
|OneToMany	| V, M | Define a one-to-many relationship between the join Tables.|
|OneToOne| V, M	| Define a one-to-one relationship between the join Tables.|
|NamedQuery / NamedQueries|	P, C |Allows a named SQL query to be stored in the annotations.|




# Mapping Associations 🗾
One end of the association must be marked as the owner. You must manage both ends of the association.
## One to one

## One to many


## Many to many


# The callbacks

Callback methods can perform actions at different stages of persistence operations.

Imagine that you want to update a customer record, but, before you update, you want to remove the hyphen from the zip code if one is present. JPA provides listeners for these kinds of activities before and after each fetch, insert, or update operation.

The callback methods can be annotated as any of the following:

- @PostLoad
- @PrePersist
- @PostPersist
- @PreUpdate
- @PostUpdate
- @PreRemove
- @PostRemove

# Embedded objects
As you've seen so far, the Customer entity has the address information inline in the entity itself. What if you want to apply class normalization concepts and come up with a separate Address class and refer to that in the Customer entity? After all, an address object could be used with Customer, Employee, Order, or User entities.

All you need is an embedded object. You move the address information into a separate class and mark that class as being embeddable, as shown in Listing 10. Refer to this newly created class from the Customer entity with @Embedded annotations.

    @Embeddable
    public class Address implements Serializable{

        private String street;

        @Column(name = "APPT",nullable = false)  
        private String appt;

        private String city;
    ..
    ..
    }
Embedded classes are mapped together with their owning entity as part of the state of that entity. However, they cannot be queried separately. Listing 11 illustrates a sample entity that uses an embedded object.

A sample entity using an embedded object

    @Entity
    public class Customer {
    ...............
        @Column(name = "FIRST_NAME", nullable = false,length = 50)
        private String firstName;

        @Embedded
        private Address address;
    ..............
    }

You can write the callback methods in the entity class itself, or you can write them in a separate class and reference them in the entity class with @EntityListeners, as shown in Listing 9.

# Inheritance 👪

An entity can extend the following:

Another entity -- either concrete or abstract.
Another non-entity, supplying behavior or non-persistence state. The attributes you inherit from a non-entity are not persisted.
Mapped superclasses, supplying common entity state. Tables in a database have similar fields, but tables are not related to each other.
Let's have a look into the various types of inheritance JPA offers. For this scenario, assume that there are two types of customer: a normal customer who buys products from a physical store and an online customer who buys products over the Internet.

Using Spring
What’s the value input from Spring in supporting JPA, you might ask?

The Spring framework supports the JPA API in couple of ways, very similar to support
for Hibernate. One way is by providing the classic template: a JpaTemplate class. This
class is basically a wrapper around the EntityManager similar to other templates such
as HibernateTemplate .
The second way is by allowing the developer to use plain JPA API in the applications
via an injected EntityManager class. If you are confused as to what approach to take,
go with using plain API if possible. This way, Spring will be used solely for dependency injection thus avoiding any dependencies on its framework classes.

Should you have earlier versions (before 3.x), perhaps sticking to template style might be easier. Let’s explore both of these use cases in detail.

Basically, Spring encapsulates the EntityManagerFactory in its own FactoryBean imple-
mentation and injects them into the applications where it is needed.
Spring uses two implementations of FactoryBean for providing the EntityManager s in
respective environments:
org.springframework.orm.jpa.LocalEntityManagerFactoryBean
This FactoryBean creates the EntityManagerFactory for standalone environments.
This implementation provides a simple factory that has limitations. It cannot par-
ticipate in global transaction s, cannot work with DataSources .
org.springframework.orm.jpa.LocalContainerEntityManagerFactoryBean
This factory bean provides the EntityManagerFactory for enterprise environments.
Note how its classname has the word “Container” embedded in it, compared to
the previous LocalEntityManagerFactoryBean class.


## References

[Understanding JPA, Part 1: The object-oriented paradigm of data persistence](https://www.javaworld.com/article/2077817/java-se/understanding-jpa-part-1-the-object-oriented-paradigm-of-data-persistence.html
)

[Understanding JPA, Part 2: Relationships the JPA way](https://www.javaworld.com/article/2077819/java-se/understanding-jpa-part-2-relationships-the-jpa-way.html)

[Spring Data Reference](https://docs.spring.io/spring-data/jpa/docs/current/reference/html/)

[Just Spring Data Access 1st Edition by by Madhusudhan Konda](https://www.amazon.com/Just-Spring-Data-Access-Hibernate/dp/1449328385/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1517621189&sr=8-1&keywords=1449328385)

[JPA Beyond Copy and Paste by Jakub Kubrynski (video)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EZwpOLCfuq4)
